docs: Add ADR for LogPipeline health status (#934)
kyma-project/telemetry-manager: docs/contributor/arch/010-logging-flow-healthiness-status-api.md

# 10. Log Flow Health Status API

Date: 2024-03-28

## Status

Proposed

## Context: Key Events in the Fluent Bit Log Flow

[ADR 003: Integrate Prometheus With Telemetry Manager Using Alerting](003-integrate-prometheus-with-telemetry-manager-using-alerting.md) describes a concept for self-monitoring and [ADR 008 Telemetry Flow Health Status API](008-telemetry-flow-healthiness-status-api.md) defines the related pipeline conditions that are derived from the OpenTelemetry Collector metrics. This ADR focuses on events in the Fluent Bit log flow.

![Fluent Bit Data Flow](../assets/fluent-bit-data-flow.drawio.svg "Fluent Bit Data Flow")

### Log Rotation

> 

Reviewer: For which purpose are we using a bullet list in the following subsections? Aren't these just normal sentences, forming a normal paragraph?

Author: Makes sense, removed them.

* Container logs are rotated and finally removed by the kubelet. Logs that have not been read by Fluent Bit before rotation are lost.

> * There is little to no indication (metrics, etc.) if this happened.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If logs are lost because of that, there is little to no indication (metrics, etc.).
```

### High Buffer Usage

* After reading logs from the host file-system, the tail input plugin writes them the a persistent buffer.
* The buffer has a limited capacity and can fill up if logs are read faster than they can be sent to the backend.

> * If the buffer is full and the tail input plugin keeps reading, the oldest logs will be dropped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If the buffer is full and the tail input plugin keeps reading, the oldest logs are dropped.
```

### Backend Throttling

* Each logging backend has an ingestion rate limit.

> * The backends maximum ingestion rate is propagated to Fluent Bit's output plugins. Either by blocking all output threads due to a slow response or returning errors, which require the output to perform retries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The backend's maximum ingestion rate is propagated to Fluent Bit's output plugins - either by blocking all output threads due to a slow response, or by returning errors, which require the output to perform retries.
```

> * The utilization of the file-system buffer is a good indicator for backend throttling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Utilization of the file-system buffer indicates backend throttling.
```

## Decision

> For the pipeline healthyness condition type, the **reason** field can show a value that is most relevant for the user. We suggest the following values, ordered from most to least critical:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the pipeline health condition type, the **reason** field can show a value that is most relevant for the user. We suggest the following values, ordered from most to least critical:
```

| AgentReceiverReadsLogs         | `sum(rate(fluentbit_input_bytes_total{...}[5m])) > 0`        |
| AgentExporterDroppedLogs       | `sum(rate(fluentbit_output_retries_failed_total{...}[5m])) > 0`    |
| AgentBufferInUse               | `telemetry_fsbuffer_usage_bytes{...}[5m] > 300000000` |
| AgentBufferFull                | `telemetry_fsbuffer_usage_bytes[5m] > 900000000`   |

Then, we map the alert rules to the reasons as follows:

| Reason | Alert Rules |
| --- | --- |
| AllTelemetryDataDropped           | **not** AgentExporterSendsLogs **and** AgentBufferFull |
| SomeTelemetryDataDropped          | AgentExporterSendsLogs **and** AgentBufferFull       |
| NoLogsDelivered                   | **not** AgentExporterSendsLogs **and** AgentReceiverReadsLogs |
| BufferFillingUp                   | AgentBufferInUse |
| Healthy                           | **not** (AgentBufferInUse **or** AgentBufferFull) **and** (**not** AgentReceiverReadsLogs **or** AgentExporterSendsLogs) |

> **NOTE:** `BufferFillingUp` should not result in a negative condition status. This reason would be aggregated as warning in the Telemetry module status.

> The file-system buffer related metrics are not mappable to a particular LogPipeline. Thus, the condition has to be set on all pipelines if indicated by file-system buffer metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The metrics related to file-system buffer are not mappable to a particular LogPipeline. Thus, the condition must be set on all pipelines if indicated by file-system buffer metrics.
```

"must be set" is very vague. Who sets it? Can we convert this sentence to active voice?

> The metrics related to file-system buffer are not mappable to a particular LogPipeline. Thus, telemetry-manager has to set the condition on all pipelines if file-system buffer usage is indicated by the metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The metrics related to file-system buffer are not mappable to a particular LogPipeline. Thus, Telemetry Manager must set the condition on all pipelines if file-system buffer usage is indicated by the metrics.
```
